[Music]
Whether food, drugs, or ideas, what you
consume influences is who you become. On
the Mind and Matter podcast, we learned
together from the best scientists and
thinkers alive today about how your mind
body reacts to what you feed it. Before
starting Mind and Matter, I spent 10
years in academia doing scientific
research. I got a PhD in neuroscience
where I focused on neuroendocrinology
and the neurobiology of behavior. And
before that, I specialized in molecular,
developmental, and evolutionary
genetics. I use my scientific background
to help parse and translate the
information that guests share on the
podcast. In addition to the podcast, I
write long- form written content
inspired by the show, where I integrate
what I've learned across episodes. I
also have a free weekly newsletter where
I provide you with upcoming guests,
share links, and provide commentary on
scientific studies and research that I'm
reading and more. Visit mind and
matter.substack.com to find all of my
[Music]
content. Thank you for joining me. Well,
thank you very much. It's a pleasure to
be here. Nick, can you start off by just
telling everyone a little bit about who
you are and what your background is?
Yeah, thank you. Um, I'm a professor of
biology at Boston College in Chestnut
Hill,
Massachusetts. I currently teach cancer
uh metabolism. Cancer is a metabolic
disease. I teach general biology to the
non- majors
uh going over fundamental aspects of
evolutionary biology and and
biochemistry as well. And uh we focus uh
um um on um maintaining or improving um
scientific literacy which seems to be uh
very in in very short supply.
uh and me among members of our of our
society. So uh we we try to improve uh
understanding of becoming more
scientifically literate and being able
to interpret uh information. So I I
teach those classes and we've been I've
been here at BC for almost 49 years uh
40 years actually and um pretty much
running my own research program for all
these years uh on a variety of different
uh backgrounds epilepsy bio lipid
biochemistry
uh cancer metabolism and now
predominantly cancer uh metabolism. Mhm.
And let's just start out with with some
basics around cancer. Can you just give
us a a good definition for what cancer
is? What characterizes cancer cells as
opposed to other cells? And what I'm
interested in here besides the
definition too is do you have a
definition that differs at all from what
we might call the orthodox definition
you might find in a textbook?
No, I I think the definition in the
textbooks are what everybody would agree
upon. And that definition is cell
division out of control or disregulated
cell growth. The the controversies and
the discussions are on what is the
origin of that and and how you manage
that. So um uh but the definition is
pretty well um accepted throughout the
scientific uh communities. Cell division
out of control uh disregulated cell
growth is what is generally referred to
as cancer. Mhm. So, so cycle has been
disrupted somehow. The cells are growing
in a disregulated fashion. There's no
disagreement on that. That's that is
what cancer is. Um, it's pretty
intuitive, too. I think the average
person gets that, you know, well enough.
But there's definitely different ideas
out there around what's causing that
dysregulation to begin with. Yeah,
that's right. That's that's where the uh
main
discussions and controversies are today
as to what is the origin of the
disregulated cell growth. How does that
how does that happen? What what would
induce a population of cells in a
particular organ uh to begin a
proliferation that is no longer
regulated. Um you know we we do in our
normal cells uh normal tissues we have
cells that will divide uh and grow and
replace other cells that have been worn
out and degraded from age and wear and
tear. Um probably the biggest or one of
the most interesting aspects of normal
cell division uh is regenerating liver.
uh a lobe of the liver can be taken off
uh either an animal or a human and you
can get uh massive rapid regrowth
um and replace the a large number of
cells that were removed in the lobe and
that that's rapid cell division under
control. It's not disregulated control.
They the cells know when to stop. uh
they don't continue to grow as opposed
to a hepatoma which is a cancer of one
of the cells in the liver uh that has
disregulated growth. Um those cells do
not they no longer respond to the
inhibitory signals that the cells in a
regenerating liver uh would uh would
have. So we have cell divisions that
occur naturally in different organs. the
gut, the crypt cells of the gut, uh all
of these all of these normal cells are
are dividing. They have cell division,
but in contrast to cancer, uh th those
cell divisions are under control and
where cancer cells are out of control.
So out of control or disregulated
doesn't merely mean that the cells are
growing quickly because as you said, we
we've got cells that divide quickly um
in different parts of the body. That
happens, but it's happening in a
regulated fashion. They know when to
grow. They know how fast to grow. And
even if they're growing quickly, it's
done uh as it's supposed to be done.
It's done in a regulated fashion. And
it's only when somehow someway the cell
cycle controls on that division get
disrupted that things become cancerous.
Yes, that's right. And so when I like I
remember very clearly being a biology
student all the way back in high school,
college, and so forth. I never studied
cancer in the lab. So my exposure was
just in the textbooks and in the
classroom. But I remember very clearly
being told um that you know we sort of
knew how cancer arose and that that is
well you know we we we've got the
genome. The genome contains the full
suite of genes. Um every cell's got a a
genome inside of it the nuclear DNA and
there are tumor suppressor genes and
there are anko genes. So these are genes
that encode things that somehow someway
are tied into the regulation of cell
cycle. And when you acquire multiple
mutations in certain genes, anka genes
promoting cancer, tumor suppressor genes
suppressing cancer, um if you get some
combination of mutations in these types
of genes, then you will get cancer. And
that is how we get cancer. That was that
was what I learned. And to what extent
is that true for certain cancers? To
what extent was that just sort of a one
model that I learned about as if it was
the model? Yeah. Well, uh, I learned the
same
model and I read the same
textbooks and I believed, uh, I I I knew
I I had no reason to challenge it. uh
that what you just described as the
model um the tumor suppressor genes the
ankco genes and and all these kinds of
things because I had taught genetics uh
I have a degree in genetics from the
University of Illinois and uh we were
all led to believe that I you know I I
didn't uh I I I was a mamalian
geneticist and we looked at at mandelian
inheritance of different things um and
then we learned that you know cancer
cells have a lot of mutations
And uh they seemed to be um out of
control driven by what you just said,
you know, tumor suppressor gene defects
and anka gene turn on and all this stuff
and we had to became deeper and deeper
into the kinds of signaling cascades and
the phosphorilation defosphorilations
and all these kinds of things that we
get more and more in depth on this. Uh
it wasn't until I I started uh uh look
when we doing work on epilepsy uh we we
um mapped genes for epilepsy many many
different genes and we studied this for
many decades at Yale University when I
was there and here at Boston College and
um we were always finding new genes but
we never were able to manage the the
epileptic seizures with the information
that those gene mutations were telling
us. And then we learned about this
ketogenic diet that seemed to work to
manage epileptic seizures uh regardless
uh of whe of the origin whe whether it
was a genetic based uh seizure whether
it was um acquired based seizure viral
in infect infection seizure. There's a
lot of ways you can get epileptic
seizures but it seemed as though this
ketogenic diet was able to manage uh a
broad range of of seizure disorders. Um
and then we said well what's the common
mechanism by which this diet could
manage these different seizures of
different origins and it was never never
clear to us. So, so can I just so it's
one way of sort of saying all of that
that you know if you go back in time and
then you and then you come back forward
in time you know we've got the molecular
revolution we have the human genome
project we start to figure out like okay
here's the genome sequence here's the
gene for this the gene for that we we
there was this thinking that there was
going to be a gene for everything and so
as an example in the epilepsy field
you're saying people started to uncover
genes that were associated in some
fashion with epilepsy and as we
accumulated that knowledge
It didn't actually tell us how to solve
epilepsy. So, we had all these genes
that were related to epilepsy, but it
wasn't really telling us what to do
treatment-wise. But then you had this
diet, the ketogenic diet, which was
effective for treating many forms of
epilepsy. And it did not depend actually
on which mutations you had or didn't
have. Yeah. And it was kind of
surprising. And then we were doing um
angioenic research on on on brain tumors
here. Uh we had found that there were
certain glyolippids that were
provocative to angioenesis. And at the
turn of the century around 1999 2000 uh
the the the work in cancer was was the
angioenesis um surge the abnormal
vascularization of tumors and Judah
Vulman had come out with from Harvard uh
saying that you if you have an antibbody
you could shut down against vascular
endothelial growth factor and you know
um uh Jim Watson of the Watson and Crick
DNA fame uh said, "Oh, Judah Vulman has
found the cure to cancer uh by targeting
blood vessels and shrinking shrinking
the tumors down to nothing." So, we we
were studying angioenesis
uh from the perspective of of
glycobiology and we were very excited
about fi finding certain glyolippids
that actually had an impact negatively
on angioenesis. Um but then we we were
also doing calorie restriction for
epilepsy and then we found out that
calorie the the work from Payton Rouse
many over about a hundred years ago
showed that calorie restriction could
shut down
angioenesis. So so we're saying whoa
what's going on with the calorie
restriction and then we found out that
the calorie restriction could also um uh
um manage manage epileptic seizures. The
ke ketogenic diets given in restricted
amounts managed epileptic seizures by
lowering blood sugar and elevating
ketones. And um calorie restriction did
the same thing. And then and then of
course we started seeing calorie
restriction really uh shrink angioenesis
in cancer cells and it was linked to the
low the level of blood sugar in the in
the in the bloodstream. So we had
published a paper showing there was a
direct relationship between how high
your blood sugar was in these were in
mice. We did linear regression analysis
and how fast the tumors would grow and
how how how the blood vessels would be
reduced in in conjunction uh with w with
w with with with lowering blood sugar.
So I said, "Wow, this is really
interesting. Anybody ever seen anything
like this before?" Of course. Of course.
Otto Worberg had seen it a long time
ago. Okay, perfect. because I was going
to ask you about some of the history
here because it I I'm again I'm not a
cancer guy so I don't know all of the
details here on the history but as I
started to read your stuff and and other
stuff in this realm it wasn't that you
know one thought I had is okay well we
must we thought that the sematic
mutation theory was the way things
worked that you accumulated these
mutations in tumor suppression anka
genes and that does appear to be the way
it works at least for some cancers to
some extent but then you know over time
our knowledge has grown but then I I
started reading some of your reviews and
I realized, oh no, actually for a long
time there's been these different
competing ideas on ankcoenesis and how
cancer arises. It's there's a deeper
history here than I realized. So who's
this Warberg character and what are his
ideas? Yeah. Well, that's I didn't know
who he was. You know, in in science we
all hear of the Warberg apparatus and
Otto Warberg. Uh his name had always
been kicked around in the background of
of whatever we did. He had a major
impact on biochemistry, one of the
leading biochemists of the 20th century
and he was involved in a lot of
different kinds of things. The the
photosynthe photosynthesis
um he he uh he had produced many not
only did he have a Nobel Prize but he
Hans Krebs worked with him uh he he
worked uh with a lot of of of leaders in
the field of biochemistry. Um so I
started to think bigger about like well
who the hell is this Warberg? what what
what did he say and how did he say it
and then why was his ideas shelved? Uh
why why did the field move away uh from
him onto what we called the genetic idea
of what cancer is with tumor suppressor
genes and anko genes and all this kind
of stuff. So I I started to go back and
my research on ma mice with brain tumors
and metastatic cancer controlling it by
lowering glucose and elevating ketones
showed me a power that uh rarely was
seen in a lot of the uh genetic ideas
about about cancer. uh with respect to
um improved quality of u progression
free and overall survival uh was really
quite improved significantly and and
then I said well what was it that Orberg
said that was inconsistent with what the
worldview
was Warberg was an interesting character
he came from a history of scientists
physicists and this kind and he was
trained in the rigid u um quantitative
German German Germanic way of doing
science. And uh he he claimed that one
mole of oxygen consumed equals 7 moles
of ATP produced and that one mole of
lactic acid uh produced equal one mole
of ATP. And he was able to uh devise a
Meerhoff quotient unto determination of
oxygen consumption related to ATP
production. And um immediately he ran
into um a buzzsaw uh with his own work
as well as that of of of Sydney
Winehouse who at that time was the
director of the National Cancer
Institute after the Second World War.
And Winehouse came right out and said
Warberg's hypothesis is not correct. uh
even though many cancer cells consume
less oxygen than normal cells, Warberg
attributed that to a a disturbance in
oxidative phosphorilation leading to a
compensatory uh f uh fermentation. So,
so in other words, as cancer cells lost
their ability to generate energy through
uh uh oxidative phosphorilation, they
were forced to um compensate the lost
energy that uh with um the fermentation
mechanism, which is energy without
without the idea there for those that
are not well verssed in this. So, our
cells can make energy using our
mitochondria and something called
oxidative phosphorilation, which
requires oxygen and that's a really good
way to make a lot of ATP, a lot of
energy. There are other ways to make
energy and they're less efficient. The
idea here that I think it sounds like
you're articulating for for what Warberg
was talking about was okay if oxygen if
oxidative phosphorilation is compromised
the sh the cell will shift to using
something like glycolysis a less
efficient way of making energy because
something has disrupted this other way
it has to make energy. Yes. and
glycolysis would be super upregulated in
cancer cells relative to normal cells.
And and he felt that that up that uh
massive upregulation of glycolysis
uh which is what they call lactic acid
fermentation
uh was the signature of what the origin
of that was the disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation. and and he said if you
disrupt oxidative phosphorilation too
acutely cells will die because they will
not have an opportunity to compensate.
So a chronic disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation led to a protracted
increase in uh in fermentation, lactic
acid fermentation. And then he was
trying to quantify those phenomenon by
showing that cancer cells took in less
oxygen but they produced a far greater
amount of lactic acid showing the
balance that the o overall energy
balance was compensated for by a non
oxidative energy metabolism. and and um
that that was that was his his his big
thing that uh what what what what Sydney
Winehouse uh jumped all over him on was
that uh which leads today which many
folks in the field today are still
behind Sydney Winehouse which we have
eviscerated completely uh but also
because of Warberg made some mistakes
but but um uh the the bottom line the
bottom line here is that Warberg had
found a couple of tumors that actually
were consuming oxygen at the same rate
as normal cells and Winehouse pointed
those out and said, "How can you
possibly have an insufficiency of
oxidative phosphorilation
uh when when uh when you have oxygen
consumption equal to that the normal
cells and tumor cells?" Yeah. and and
Warberg said, "Well, um uh the the
fermentation was unable to put out the
the the oxfas uh um the the ox and the
cells was unable to squelch the
fermentation." So I guess others Yeah,
let me let me others then jumped on the
idea that oh no, this is a this is a
problem uh with fermentation. It's an
abnormal fermentation has nothing to do
with an insufficient oxidative
phosphorilation. and the field jumped on
this because ankco genes and all this
became the drivers of the fermentation.
Uh and and and going back to the oxygen
consumption argument of Warberg, it was
wrong. So, so as an episode in history,
uh this is perhaps a good lesson because
you know biology is messy. Uh our
knowledge is incomplete. Warberg had
ideas, other people had ideas. There
were exceptions that seem to contradict
some people's ideas and people were
debating, you know, why are we observing
this if this is true and so on and so
forth. And so the score was never really
settled there. People disagreed, but it
sounds like what ended up happening is
um the field sort of uh uh agreed that
one one set of ideas was true even
though things weren't truly resolved.
Yeah. And and I think the biochemists
were beating each other up uh o over
these observations uh and everybody
coming out with a slightly different uh
interpretation. Um was Warberg right?
Was Warberg wrong? Uh what does this
support him? did this not support him?
And that was all during the 1930s and
40s and 50s and then of course with the
uh Watson and Crick Nobel Prize for the
structure of DNA but of course many
others were part of part of this DNA
revolution and um you know back at the
early part of of the century in in 1914
um uh Theodore Bovery uh claimed that
cancer might be due to some sort of
chromosomeal aberration. And maybe it
has maybe it's it's the chromosomes that
that might be uh because every time you
look at a at a tumor cell, there was
always abnormal chromosomes uh in there.
And it was that was just more or less um
a kind of an off and and and Bovery
himself clear in that first he said you
know it was all speculative. He said I
have no know he never studied cancer in
his life. He said I'm probably I'm
embarrassing the field. I'm I'm an
interloper. I don't know what I'm
talking about. He said the cancer could
be just as due to something in the
cytoplasm, but I have no idea. I'm just
speculating on this. Anyway, when Watson
and Cricks came out, um, oh wow, this
genomic stuff may have been already
known way back in 1914 by Theodore
Bovery. Oh my god. So, we anointed him
as the father of the gene theory of
cancer, Theodore Bovery. Um, and in the
meantime,
biologists have always been u inferior
in some ways uh to physics. uh physics
is the pure intellectual idea of human
brain. Uh the highest level of of
quantitative assessment comes from
physics. So many biologists have always
had physics envy. And when Watson and
Crick came out with the quantitative
analysis of of of nucleic acid patterns
to link to amino acid structures, we now
bring biology into a molecular range far
more quantitative and less messy. uh as
you said seen as a harder science. A
harder absolutely even the physicists
were jumping in into the biology area
now because they felt that they could
use some of their skills and knowledge
to further understand the molecular
biology of of the cell and and why it
was just like a a stampede of people.
Everybody you had to do something
molecular. Biology was no longer systems
approach. it was now a molecular kind of
a and one thing one thing I I think I
want to emphasize here and and I'll you
know get your input if you think this is
true you know science science is this
thing that people have invented and we
have this sort of ideal of science what
it looks like if you're fully rational
and dispassionate and you're making
totally objective observations but we
have to remember also that it's a human
enterprise and humans are social
creatures and we all have careers and
aspirations and motivations that have to
do with the social realm. And once the
molecular revolution happened in the
mid- 20th century through to the human
genome project and really until very
recently in my
opinion, one of the ways that you could
make a real career for yourself as a
scientist in the molecular biology realm
was identifying a gene for something,
identifying an anka gene or a tumor
suppressor gene. And so there was this
really really sort of simplistic gene
ccentric mindset developed because you
could really make a whole career on
cloning and isolating and identifying
genes involved with cancer or some other
disease. And it got us into this sort of
very simplistic geneentric mindset. I
think is that how how you see it or or
how you see it? I think it started that
way for sure. Uh in in in a less
complicated way which was thought only
to uh explode into a into a hopelessly
complicated situation which we have
today. Um but before we got there we
thought uh that we could uh
identify specific mutations that could
be responsible for the disregulated cell
growth. Um a and then it became it
became as it as the s as the field
evolved and Warberg was left behind and
getting back to your uh human nature
behavior. Sydney Winehouse had some
animosity towards uh Otto Warberg uh
because of Hitler sparing him during the
Second World War. Um and and and uh he
should have been gassed uh with the with
during the Holocaust. Why why was Hitler
sparing him? And the stories that Sam
Apple brought out in his book Ravenous,
uh what Hitler feared cancer, like there
was no tomorrow. His mother died of
breast cancer or something. And um he
knew Warberg was the the guy in the
world uh that would have a better
understanding of of cancer than anyone.
And if there was going to be a solution
to this cancer problem, it would have
been Warberg. Um so he survived Second
World War working. He had no he was no
fan of Hitler, believe me. He threw the
brown skirts out of his lab. I mean he
was quite uh but he just wanted to
continue with his with his research and
then after the war uh White House and
other uh Jewish folks were concerned
that why what why did he survive when
the rest of us had to suffer. I see. So
they they had an interpretation that
maybe there was some nefarious reason
for that even though apparently there
wasn't. And remind me Wine House was at
the National Institutes of Health at a
pretty high position. So, so that was a
politically powerful position that
probably enabled White House to have
their ideas spread further and faster
than they otherwise would have been.
Yeah. And the other thing too is Dean
Burke was um uh a strong supporter of of
Warberg and Dean Burke was also before
Winehouse the head of the National
Cancer Institute and he was thrown under
the bus with Warberg. of them were
discounted uh for various reasons and
and and um because the field was so much
more excited in the gene uh and and
getting into the molecular basis for
this and felt that the guys in the
biochemistry were not um were not really
doing anything. And in 1976, uh,
Winehouse wrote this book, wrote this
paper about Warberg's flicker of of
metabolism flickers only dimly now as
the field has moved away from this
ambiguity. And he eviscerated uh,
Warberg. And he even said to himself, he
hate to say say unfavorable things to a
guy who died. Warberg died in 1970. and
Wine House wrote this paper in 1976 and
pretty much, you know, just just ripped
apart everything that that Warberg had
said and why he was wrong and all this
all this kind of stuff. So, so we've got
the science actually happening. People
are in the lab, they're making
observations, they're coming up with
hypotheses, but there's also these
political and social, career, human
aspects to what's going on. So, people
have, you know, political motivations or
career motivations to go with or against
other people. They want certain ideas to
spread, others not to spread. And so,
you know, that's all mixed together with
legitimate observational and and
scientific uh disagreements that were
happening. Absolutely. That's the way
science works. Uh you you have an idea
and and if you can get enough support
for your idea, you can you can turn the
direction of the field. A and uh as the
genes more and more genes became
recognized in cancer cells uh you know I
think there were Nobel prize prizes for
anko genes and tumor suppressor genes
and these kinds of things and and then
it became it gradually became more and
more clear as the as the technology for
genetic analysis improved uh over the
years that cancer cells had thousands
and different kinds of of mutations. um
how is it possible that that any one of
these mutations could be linked to
disregulated cell growth? So then we had
to parse uh the types of mutations that
were uh present in these cells and we
called them pass at least
um Dr. Vogelstein from John's Hopkins
started to parse them out into passenger
genes and and and driver genes. So the
driver genes became more uh recognized
as those that were more likely to be
involved in disregulated cell growth
than some of these other passenger
genes. And then it became clear and
clear that, you know, we couldn't find
specific drivers that might be
responsible for disregulated cell
growth. Like the p-53
uh tumor suppressor gene uh was thought
to be the key driver of cancer, but not
all cancers had mutations in p-53 and it
was not always so clear uh about what
about what was going on. So then then he
introduced the dark matter. May maybe
maybe these really bad the real drivers
uh are in this called genomic dark
matter that that was nowhere to be found
or nobody knew what what it was. But it
was a it was saying yeah yeah the dark m
the dark matter. So so uh um what does
that mean? you know, it became it
started to become more bizarre uh as it
was not possible to uh to specifically
identify uh a particular gene or even a
group of genes that could count account
for the disregulated growth. Yeah, this
is a let me let me just say when we
started to take apart cancers and we
started to separate them into individual
cells uh within a tumor and then clone
up those cells and then do genomic
screens on the individual cells to get a
better picture. Every cell in the tumor,
not one cell had the same genetic
problems as any other cell within the
same tumor. Yeah. Yeah. And so this is
this is another common pattern in in
science, I think, where, you know,
someone has an idea, they have a
hypothesis. Naturally, you want your
hypothesis to be right. You want your
theory to be correct. So, you're trying
to gain support for it. But very often,
you start to accumulate these
observations that just don't fit with
it, things you can't quite explain. And
what often happens is that the
hypothesis just becomes more and more
elaborate and you start adding all these
auxiliary hypotheses to your theory and
you come up with these new concepts.
This is like what you meant by by the
dark matter concept and stuff like that.
You have to make your theory more
elaborate to accommodate the
observations that actually aren't quite
fitting with the original idea. And
before the theory actually dies or goes
away, sometimes years or decades can go
by where it becomes this sort of complex
and elaborate monstrosity compared to
what it was originally. And it's because
you're starting to accumulate ideas over
time that don't actually quite fit with
that idea. Yeah. Well, that's exactly
right. And and that and that uh shows
the um almost exactly what you said was
the situation uh for the um geocentric
theory uh of the solar system. um for
1,800 years from the from from from the
time of of Aristotle to Tami uh it was
thought that the earth uh was the center
of of of the solar system and the uh
mathematics to explain the movement of
the planets became more and more complex
with epicycles deference and equants and
it turned into a giant massive ball of
thread um challenging all of the minds
at that time to come up with more and
better and more sophisticated
mathematical formulas to explain the
movements of the planets. Even
Capernacus himself was struggling with
these same uh mathematics until he put
the the sun in the center of the solar
system using the same mathematics. Now,
now you could predict, you became
predictable as to where the planets
would be a and uh the the sun um was the
center of the solar system with the
earth just simply being another planet
moving around along with the other
planets and everything called the
capernician revolution and and
everything made sense uh from a a
massive amount of complexity and and
right now in the in the in the gene
theory, we we're stuck in this in this
uh quagmire of of more and more
complexity.
uh like like you like you've just like
you've just mentioned um ignoring
ignoring uh facts uh that have emerged
also in this complexity that are very
inconsistent with the with the somatic
mutation theory for example sir Michael
Stratton out of England sir Michael
Stratton for his massive work he's done
on genomic uh revolutions genomic
analysis he published a paper in breast
cancer showing a significant number of
breast tumors that had no mutations. um
in compar using the same technology
where he found other breast tumors
loaded with mutations uh he found some
uh about 30% of breast tumors that had
that had no mutations and I I I said wow
this is interesting what does he say
about it and the answer was nothing it
was not even me the data were presented
but there was no discussion about just
kind of didn't talk about it no didn't
talk about it and and then there was a
paper by Parsons and a big group I can't
I don't can't remember where they were
may maybe John's hop Hopkins. I think
they were at Johns Hopkins as well. Um
where they did a big screen uh uh on
glyopblasto and um they looked at about
25 or 30 cases and they found mutations
in all of the major uh mutations in
these in the PI3 AKT signaling the the
um um three ba major signaling pathways
except one except one uh sample. It had
no mutations in any of the any of the
major pathways. The B B20 some in their
figure three of the paper and the the
the BR20 sample had no mutations. And I
said, "Wow, how do you how do you
explain that?" And of course, not a
single word was mentioned about the
single sample that had no mutations in
any of the three pathways. Um we're now
seeing uh more more cancers. there's
some appendimoblasttoomas in children
where they have no mutations yet they
all have they yet they all have
disregulated cell growth. So that was
kind of like well a headscratcher
because those findings are not
consistent with the sematic mutation
theory. And now with the deeper
sequencings over the last few years,
we're seeing driver gene mutations p-53
as well as others with significant
mutations in the structure of the p-53
and other uh u driver mutations in
normal tissues in normal cells and
tissues all throughout our body with no
disregulated cell growth associated with
the mutations in the driver genes. Okay.
So you're saying over time we've
accumulated these weird examples where
in some cases you have cancer cells but
they don't have mutations in the ankco
genes or the tumor suppressor genes and
in other cases you've got normal cells
that are not cancer cells and they do
have those mutations and so these things
have just sort of accumulated to some
extent at least and they largely went
sort of unexplained. people just sort of
said, well, it's just one cell line in
that paper and they just really didn't
talk about it. Well, and and the most
some of the more recent papers have come
out even discussing the cancer cells
that have uh normal cells that have
driver mutations and and uh they don't
really like to discuss the fact that
there's some cancer cells that don't
have mutations because they say, well,
you can't support anything by the
absence of evidence. Um uh maybe our
techniques weren't as sophisticated.
There's always some excuse, but it's
harder to explain the driver mutations
with mutations in normal tissues. So,
what they say is we maybe we now have to
parse the concept of driver mutations
and and say that the search is not yet
complete for the really some
supercategory of driver mutations that
we seem to be missing. Even though we've
got even though we've cataloged over 100
million different kinds of mutations, we
still have not found the ones that
leading to the disregulated cell growth.
So it's more so the search is not
complete. Yeah. So so the two ways to
view this conundrum are okay the search
is not complete the mutations must be
there and we just haven't found him yet.
Or the alternative would be well you're
you're looking at you're looking up the
wrong tree here. Yeah. Yeah. Well that's
hard that as you mentioned at the very
beginning Nick very hard to say you
might not have been correct in the
theory that you built your career
around. Yeah. Okay. So so but let me let
me say one more thing. The devast the
most devastating evidence against the
somatic mutation theory has has come
from the nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments where the nucleus of a tumor
cell is now placed in a cancer um uh in
a normal cytoplasm. So you would expect
that the normal cell to turn into a
cancer cell because it's going to now
have all of those mutations that are
supposedly there. Yeah. So, and and and
you don't get that that and the Israel
Schaefer experiments along with uh
Invivo, Rudy Enish's group down here at
MIT. Um we had Jim Morgan's group at at
St. Jude's. Uh we had Beatric Mintz at
at Thomas Jefferson. All of these
classical developmental biologists
uh were finding evidence that was
inconsistent uh with the sematic
mutation theory. So, um, you pile that
on top of the some cancers without
mutations, normal cells with driver
mutations and and and a new a cancer
nucleus uh uh being with with supposedly
the the the the drivers and the uh tumor
suppressors uh placed into a normal
cytoplasm with normal mitochondria is
the the neoplastic phenotype is
completely suppressed. And on the other
hand, if you take the normal nucleus and
put it into a tumor cytoplasm, you end
up with cells that are disregulated in
their growth. Wow. The the these these
observations clearly state that the
origin of disregulated growth resides in
the cytoplasm, not in the nucleus. Wow.
Okay. So, so literally, people can do
experiments where you've got cancer
cells, you've got non-cancer cells. You
can suck the nucleus with all of the
nuclear DNA out of a cancer cell and put
it into a normal cell. And if it's the
case that the cancer is caused by
mutations in that nuclear DNA, you
should then cause the non-cancer cell to
become a cancer cell because you're
putting in all those mutations. But you
don't see that. And then you're saying
vice versa. You can take the nucleus of
a normal cancer cell or non-cancer cell.
So it's got none of these supposed
mutations in it. Put it into a cancer
cell and it's still a cancer cell. And
you're saying that indicates that
whatever's causing the cancer to be
cancer is in the cytoplasm rather than
the nucleus. Yeah, absolutely. And and
and and those discussions of the nuclear
transfer experiments um very interesting
uh how they respond to them. uh uh one
uh person uh a leader in the field uh
one of the most uh recognized leaders in
the field was confronted with the data
uh with those uh mito mitochondrial
nuclear transfer experiments and said if
that if those experiments are true the
whole cancer field needs to be turned
upside down and be recognized as
incorrect. Therefore, those experiments
cannot be
true. That preserves the dogma of what's
going on. In other words, you they're so
profound in their in their
interpretation that it can't be true.
Yet, the leaders in the field of
developmental biology were the ones who
who did this. And the beautiful thing
about that, they were unbiased. They
were not asking whether cancer were a
genetic disease or a mitochondrial
metabolic disease. They were simply
asking the question can the nucleus of a
tumor cell direct normal development and
the answer is yes up to a degree and
then the system would abort. But uh they
never thought I was the one who took all
that and I reinterpreted the data in
light of the sematic mutation theory uh
that this is completely inconsistent
with the sematic mutation theory of
cancer. Uh they those guys were not
asking that question. They wanted to
know how far in development a cancer how
how how how far could a a cancer nucleus
drive normal developmental processes.
And then it turns out that there's yes
there are mutations in the nucleus of
the tumor cell. But it seemed to be
those the products of those genes were
absolutely essential for moving the
organism from one developmental epoch to
the next. And when that gene was not
there, the system imploded and aborted
and and that's what they sat that's what
they found. Okay. So, so in essence,
you've got two competing schools of
thought. The sematic mutation theory,
which is basically that you get DNA
mutations and that drives cancer. You've
just laid out some of the history there.
Some of the problems that kept popping
up with that hypothesis. You've also got
this other school of thought, what some
people have called what you've written
the mitochondrial metabolic theory. And
this is more akin to Warberg's ideas
that that look at it as a more of a
metabolic and mitochondrial issue. So if
I go back to what you said about
Warberg's ideas, tell me if this is a
fair characterization of sort of what
the essence of his hypothesis was. If
you shut off a cell's ability to use
oxidative phosphorilation, it's
mitochondria to generate energy, if you
do that quickly, the cell's going to die
because it's just not going to have
enough energy to to live. However, if
you do that slowly, if you sort of in a
prolonged fashion choke off the
mitochondria's ability to use oxidative
phosphorilation, the cell will adapt to
that in some sense by using glycolysis
and other forms of energy production
more than its
mitochondria and that is then going to
lead to the formation of cancer. Is that
a fair summary of what that idea was?
Yes. And now we just now we just have to
get into it a little bit more detailed
and and show the actual uh processes by
which that that can happen and what
happened with Warberg. So he was rigid
in in saying that one mole of oxygen uh
consumed was seven moles of ATP and the
field uh was locked into that idea that
oxygen consumption is a good marker for
production of ATP. Um we just published
a paper very recently doing it uh using
a novel experimental design showing that
brain tumor cells uh both mouse and
human oxygen consumption is not an
accurate marker for ATP production
through oxidative phosphorilation. So
people were making an assumption that
there would be a really tight
correspondence between the oxygen
consumption of a cell and how much it
was using oxidative phosphorilation
which sounds like a very natural
assumption because oxidative
phosphorilation depends on oxygen. But
what you're saying is that assumption is
actually not that good and for a cancer
cell it's very accurate for a normal
cell but not accurate for a cancer cell.
And Warberg was basing his uh actually
it was Hans Krebs who developed the the
technique for assuming that or for
showing clearly showing that oxygen
consumption was linked to ATP
production. Uh uh and he did he he did
those experiments and Warberg simply use
assumed also like everybody else does
that this is true that oxygen
consumption is a surrogate marker for
ATP production and in normal cells it
is. Uh but in cancer cells it's not.
they're uncoupled. Uh they they use
oxygen to produce reactive oxygen
species uh with much much less ATP
coming from the oxygen consumed than
what would be happening in a normal
cell. Okay. So we were the first not not
only us there was a few other
experiments done in the scientific
literature showing that cancer cells use
oxygen for some for activities other
than ATP production. Yeah. So, so this
was the big mistake and and now today,
listen to this. We're using the Seahorse
oxygen consumption uh machine uh
instrument sold by the millions and
millions of dollars all over the world
for measuring uh ATP uh for measuring o
using uh formulas to assume how much ATP
is being produced for oxygen
consumption. Never never using the
direct chemical measurements like we
did. Yeah. So, so, so the idea is we use
bioluminescence showing the degree of
ATP. Uh, seahorse instrument that most
people use now to say that oxygen
consumption is normal in to in cancer
cells. Yes, the cancer cells are taking
in oxygen, but they use a formula to
estimate ATP. They're actually measuring
ATP. Start. We're the only ones the
first group to actually measure
simultaneously oxygen consumption with
ATP production. And there's a disconnect
in cancer cells. It's so so I mean I I
wish more people outside of science
understood how common this is. But when
you are using it's very common in
science for something like this to
happen where you're using
calculation to stand in for direct
observation and because you're doing
math and because it seems fancy and
rigorous you lose sight of the fact that
you're not actually observing things
directly you're making assumptions that
are masquerading as observation. Yeah.
that and that was one thing and the
other thing that Warberg did not know
about uh and nor do many people today
know about that the cancer cell
generates energy through two different
types of fermentation. one is the in the
cytoolic
uh in the in the payoff phase of the
glycolysis pathway in the mdhoff ars
pathway uh where you get uh uh ATP there
and that's everybody knows that's up
upregulated in cancer cells but the
problem is there's different types of
pyuvate kynise so you produce a lot of
lactic acid but it's not an accurate
marker for how much ATP is coming
because the pyuvate kynise M2 isoform
allows lactic acid to be produced but
it's not linked to ATP production
through that step. So measuring lactic
acid is not an accurate marker for
determining how much ATP you're getting
through through fermentation. That's
number one. Number two, all many people
in the cancer field know cancers are
glutamine addicted. Glutamine addicted.
What is glutamine? Glutamine is an amino
acid. Most abundant amino acid in our
body. It's in the bloodstream. It's it's
a it's a very valuable amino acid to run
our immune system, our our uh ura cycle.
that's needed for for nucleic acid
synthesis. I it's it's a very for our
gut, the health of our gut. Uh we use
glutamine. Glutamine is the most
abundant amino acid in the body and it's
there for very specific reasons uh that
that we we know about. Um at any event,
the field knew that cancer cells were
addicted to glutamine. So you put cancer
cells in in oxygen and you see they
taken in glutamine. Oh, glutamine is
being respired. It's called an
anoplurotic. I hope I'm not getting too
deep in the science here for you. No,
no, no. Keep keep going. Keep going.
Because it's an anoplurosis. Anoplurosis
means the replenishment of the TCA cycle
with carbons. So when you look at uh
oxygen consumption and the and the uh gl
the the glutamine is pouring into these
cancer cells and they they thought the
glutamine was being respired. We now
have direct evidence that the glutamine
is fermented in the mitochondria by by a
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. So the mis why the mi
the misinterpretation of the data
because oh my my my cancer cells are
taking in oxygen and they're blowing out
uh ATP and we're seeing the ATP. The
problem is what's the origin of the ATP?
It's coming through a glutamol
fermentation glutaminolysis pathway
dumping out suinic acid as a waste
product. So su suinate does not stay in
the TCA cycle. It's getting blown out as
a as a waste product. This is all new
stuff. This is brand new stuff. Yeah.
Yeah. So basically one way to summarize
some of that is our cells have multiple
ways of creating ATP the currency of
energy in our cells. There's oxidative
phosphorilation in the mitochondria.
There's fermentation in the cytool.
There's lots of different details that
can go into exactly how oxygen and other
things like amino acids get sucked in
and then converted into energy. And many
people have made mistakes or assumptions
about you know if I measure this one
output it means this is being used or
that's being used and a lot of those
assumptions have been mistaken uh in the
past and so there's been a lot of
confusion generated about what means
what in terms of inputs and outputs with
respect to energy production in the
cells. Yeah, absolutely. And and and and
if you go in the textbooks, you know, it
says predominantly uh u cytoolic ATP
production uh fermentation and and
oxidative phosphorilation. But there's
there's what we now broken it down by
into traditional biochemistry. We have
two forms of ATP production. One is
through oxidative phosphorilation
uh uh in the mitochondrial inner
membrane through a chemo chemiosmotic
hypothesis of Peter Mitchell. Uh and
then we have substrate level
phosphorilation and substrate level
phosphorilation is the movement of a
phosphate group to an organic molecule
to produce ATP. So so you can produce
ATP with a non oxidative process and
there's two of those. One is in the
cytoplasm and one is in the mitochondria
itself at the suanil coa ligase
reaction. uh alpha ketogluterate to
suininal COA to suxenate and you get
everybody said oh it's GTP in cancer
it's ATP and and they make a buttload of
it in in in the tumor metabolism and
they're dumping out suxinic acid. Let me
let me give you uh people in the heart
field uh the cardiovascular field knew
knew about this but never never turned
it over to the cancer field. For
example, when individuals have heart
attacks, uh what you see right after the
heart attack is a buildup of lactic acid
and suinic acid in the bloodstream. And
those are the fermentation fuels that
are compensating for the acute loss of
oxidative phosphorilation. And your bo
your neurons need to have a a proton
mode of gradient. They need a an
electrical process across the membrane
otherwise they're going to die. they
they cannot compensate for loss of oxfos
chronically to upregulate uh substrate
level phosphorilation. So what happens
is that you build up this massive amount
of of succinic acid and lactic acid and
as soon as the blood oxygen come back in
suinic acid and lactic acid both
disappear because because they were
needed there for a short period of time
to m to maintain the electrical chemical
gradients otherwise you're going to be
dead. So cancer cells are dumping out
lactic acid and suxinic acid even in the
presence of oxygen. Very different than
what happens during heart attacks and
interruptions of acute interruption of
oxidative phosphorilation. And this is
what Warberg said. Warberg said cancer
cells continue to ferment in oxygen. But
he didn't know that fer that glutamine
was the second major fermentable fuel.
And that caused a lot of confusion. So
so uh we've cleared all that up now. it
becomes very clear we've cleared up the
ambiguities associated with all these
mis mis uh assumptions and now we we
have hard data to support uh how these
cancer cells are in fact living in the
absence of oxygen using a fermentation
or in minimal levels of oxygen so uh a
couple things I want people to get here
so under normal conditions non-cancer
conditions you know I'm breathing in air
I'm that oxygen's going to my blood it's
getting to all my cells and they're
using that as an electron acceptor in
the electron transport chain of the
mitochondria. This is part of the
oxidative phosphorilation way that we
make a lot of our energy. If I start
working out really really hard, I can't
keep up with how, you know, how far I'm
pushing my muscles. And so things shift
from, you know, I I sort of running out
of oxygen in a sense. And so things
shift towards uh glycolysis and these
other forms of energy production. And
that's what builds up things like lactic
acid. And that's why say you start to
get tired and your muscles burn when
you're working out hard. Is that
accurate? Yes. And you also build up
some suinic acid as well. And but so
what you're saying is okay, that's how
things work under normal conditions. We
would assume that um if lactic acid is
building up and things like this, it
must mean um the cell's not able to use
oxygen. But what you're saying is tied
to Warberg's ideas is what actually
seems to happen in some cancer cells is
they kick out some of these things that
you would expect to see in the absence
of oxygen even in the presence of
oxygen. Absolutely. Absolutely. And
people and the big thing now is they're
kicking out both um listen to this.
They're kicking out lactic acid and
suinic acid. Uh suxinic acid leaves the
TCA. It always should stay in the TCA
cycle if you're respiring. But the tumor
cells are dumping suinic acid out. And
not only that, suxinic suinic acid
stabilizes Hif 1 alpha, a major ankco
gene. Uh the stabilization of Hif 1
alpha allows the glycolytic pathway to
proceed at maximal maximal uh efficiency
uh turned on. So the ankco genes that we
have now found out like Hif 1 alpha and
mick. These ankco genes are
facilitators of allowing the cell to
shift to a fermentation metabolism
because oxfos becomes chronically
disrupted. uh ankco genes turn on open
the floodgates to get glucose and
glutamine into the cell to replace to
replace the we to replace the um uh
reduction in energy through oxidative
phosphoration. Well, I think this starts
to bring us to the idea that um I wanted
to get to which is you know we can
juxtapose a sematic mutation theory and
a mitochondrial meta metab metabolic
theory here for for ankcoenesis. But
these things are not mutually exclusive,
right? You can have metabolic shifts
that say generate reactive oxygen
species and lipid peroxides that then
mutate the DNA. And as you just
mentioned, you can apparently have DNA
mutations that actually then facilitate
or lock in metabolic shifts. Well, I
don't know if they're mutations that
there when you when you when you uh this
is what Greg Smensa found when when when
oxygen uh becomes deprived uh hifin
alpha which is made and broken and made
and broken becomes becomes uh stabilized
and that immediately upregulates the
fermentation pathway. So it's not really
a mutation. It's a gene expression
change. Yeah, it's it's a gene
expression thing. So uh so what happens
is that you are now allowing um ankco
genes to be uh expressed uh and and on
and and of course if the if the oxygen
um comes back the ankco genes are are
are are downregulated. I see. So it's
metabolic change in tandem with
epigenetic changes in expression of
genes rather than mutations in the
sequence itself. Absolutely. Yes. So and
and and and this is what this is what
was shown. Um when when you take a
cancer cell that has ankco gene
expression and you and you have abnormal
mitochondria in there, deficient
oxidative phosphorilation, you see these
ankco genes on and when you put new
mitochondria, the ankco genes turn off
because you don't need them anymore
because they're respiring.
So, but they are abs essential to
maintain viability of the cell uh when
oxidative phosphorilation is in
insufficient to maintain viability. So,
they'll do it. So, one thing I want to
ask you about um because I want people
to get this piece because it it's
important here, but it's also just more
generally important when we're thinking
about cell biology and metabolism
generally speaking. You mentioned the
term coupling or uncoupling. And a lot
of as you just told us um over the last
few minutes a lot of confusion in this
field in the cancer field arose because
people didn't understand the
relationship between oxygen and ATP
production and how that varied how
tightly those things were correlated or
not under different conditions and you
said that the can cancer cells are often
relatively uncoupled. When you say the
word coupling and uncoupling with
respect to mitochondria ATP production
and oxygen what does that mean? What is
coupling? Yeah. Yeah. Well, coupling
means that the that the uh that the um
production of
ATP through the F1 F-Zero ATPA sometimes
they call it complex 5. It's a very
elaborate protein complex in the inner
membrane of the mitochondria that that
that proton motive gradient in that
builds up in the inner membrane space of
the mitochondria.
um uh the the ATP production is is
coupled to the to the um uh to the
degree of of proton protons uh
accumulating in the inner space. So so
uh those protons come passing back
through the f10 linked to the production
of ATP with oxygen pulling pulling the
electrons through all these all these
different proteins. So oxygen serving as
a as an a as an acceptor of electrons is
directly coupled to the production of
ATP through the have zero ATPAS. So when
this is happening when things are
tightly coupled oxygen it's almost like
a conveyor belt and oxygen is the thing
that's sort of making the conveyor belt
turn to generate the energy and so you
have very very maximally efficient ATP
production when you're in a tightly
coupled regime but then the extent that
the things become uncoupled what
happens? Yeah. Well, here's the situ.
But during that coup, when you say that
coupling, it's not only the oxygen
pulling the electrons through the
various protons of the electron
transport chain, that that pulling of of
electrons is is is linked to the pumping
of protons. So the pulling of one pumps
the other creating the proton motive
gradient, which is then coupled to ATP
production. It's very an incredibly
sophisticated machinery. Um but when you
have uncoupling the proton mode of
gradient the the hydrogen protons pass
back through the membrane into the
matrix. So you're so you're leaking.
Yes. You're you're leaking. Now some
some of them some of these leakages can
be directed by uncoupling proteins. Uh
and some of these uncoupling proteins
are actually activated in cancer cells.
So you're dissipating the proton mode of
gradient the electrochemical gradient by
by dissipating that. That's called
uncoupling and but it's a very important
natural part of normal cells uh to be to
know how to couple and uncouple the
membranes go both directions it's
regulated sometimes a cell wants to be
more coupled or more uncoupled uh it it
has to be very carefully regulated uh
because uh this is the way we produce
heat when we uncouple we produce heat
rather than ATP so the the the energy is
is generated by ther thermo regulation
rather than ATP production, but this in
some tissues allows us to do this
depending on the environmental
situation. So, it's a very sophisticated
system, but in cancer, it's broken. Uh
they're uncoupled and they're broken.
They're not they're not able to generate
an active proton mode gradient, thereby
leak causing the cell to force into a
fermentation because as Warberg said,
energy is everything. Without ATP,
nothing can survive. You must have ATP
to to allow all the gene expression
profiles. you have to have ATP. How is
that coming? H So, so how general is the
observation? How firm is the observation
that in cancer you tend to be more
uncoupled in your mitochondria than
coupled? The evidence for that is the
massive production of reactive oxygen
species. So uncoupling tends to produce
more reactive oxygen species. Yes. Yes.
So you have to be very careful about and
cancer cells are known to have a massive
amount of of of the uh the hydroxide
radical and those are those things are
carcinogenic and mutagenic. Yeah. Yeah.
So the DNA mutations that you see in
cancer cells many of them a lot of them
are are caused by the reactive oxygen.
So so are you saying so an implication
of that if I'm hearing this correctly is
that so if mitochondrial uncoupling
leads to less efficient energy
production and it produces more
reactive oxygen species and things that
can cause mutations. Could it be true
that historical observations of Anka
genes and mutations this was actually a
downstream effect of this kind of
metabolic change that happened rather
than being sort of the cause? Yeah,
absolutely. That's it. That that that's
that's one of the things. And just like
I said with the nuclear transfer
experiments,
that would explain why in some cell
lines you see these mutations and some
you don't. It's because this was all
happening downstream of this
mitochondrial metabolic change and the
mutations aren't actually necessary but
they might be observed sometimes as a
consequence of the reactive oxygen
species production. Yeah. And not only
that also from the acidification of the
micro environment because what happens
when the cell the cancer cell is not
efficient in generating energy through
oxidative phosphorilation. Yes, it makes
a lot more reactive oxygen species which
further damage the ability of the uh uh
the efficiency of the electron transport
chain but but don't forget what are the
waste products of fermentation are
lactic acid and suinic acid which
acidify the micro environment creating
more disturbances in the nuclear genome.
So when people look at cancer, they
always say the nuclear genome is shot to
hell and it could be all varied in
different ways and different cells and
different conditions all very different
from each other. So let me ask you this.
This is just something that's coming to
mind spontaneously for me. So if all if
all of that is true then I think it
makes a very clear prediction with what
I'm about to ask you. So obviously the
extent to which our mitochondria are
coupled can change based on
environmental conditions. You know you
can become more or less coupled or
uncoupled. you know, at any given time.
That being said, there are maternal
hapllet types, so the type of
mitochondrial uh DNA and mitochondria
that you inherit from your mother that
are more intrinsically coupled or
uncoupled. Some of us have a have a
mitochondrial hletype that makes us tend
to be very very coupled and some of us
have one that tends to make us more
uncoupled. Is it known whether people
with more intrinsically coupled
mitochondrial hlet types tend to get
cancer at lower rates?
Uh the answer is I don't know. Okay. I I
think that question needs to be looked
at a little bit more
carefully. Now knowing that that cancer
is a mitochondrial metabolic disorder,
that type of question should be uh
looked at in a little bit more in a
little bit more uh serious way. But you
think is that is that a good question or
a good way to think about it? I think I
think it needs to be looked at. I I
certainly think there needs to be some
some evaluation of that. It was never
really thought about. If you think the
disorder is caused by somatic mutations,
your your entire academic focus is on
something other than that. Right? So, uh
now that once you realize that there's a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder,
questions like that now become
interesting. Let's go back and let's go
back and see if we can look at that. And
we know that yes the the the haploype
that those mitochondria are eventually
distributed to all all different uh
cells and tissues uh in in our body and
they all have different levels of
uncoupling as part of their natural
environment and what they do in those
organs. Uh so some are generated from
more heat, others are more capable of of
of coupling than uncoupling. And all of
that are the sophistication and
modifications of mitochondrial function
ending up in different tissues and
organs of our of our body. Uh and so we
need to we need to look at that. We we
know that cancer cells can there there's
um substrate level phosphorilation is an
absolute absolute essential cap um
phenotype for having disregulated cell
growth and and and the rarity of cancer
in neurons of the brain and in card
mature cardomyioytes they are they are
uncap incapable of shifting to substrate
level phosphorilation. So you rarely if
ever get cancers in cells that cannot
ferment. Um but the level of uncoupling
that would allow the the the variability
in cells needs to be looked at uh uh
more more carefully. Mo the most
important thing again you how do we how
do we connect this to
disregulated cell growth. Okay we great
we have all this it turns out and very
clearly uh that the proton motive
gradient in the mitochondria through
calcium signaling controls the cell
cycle. So the cell cycle uh uh when how
how how we should divide and how we
should become dormant and quscent is all
under the control of the calcium
gradients within the within the
mitochondria. So what happens when that
mitochondria loses its capability of
producing energy efficiently? The cell
falls back on its default state which is
proliferation. All cells when life first
emerged on our planet. There was no
oxygen in the atmospheres. Yet yet uh we
had cells that were dividing and they
were disregulated in their cell growth
out of control. And as Albert Senurgi
said this alpha period of life on Earth
was
purely unbridled proliferation driven by
fermentation metabolism. There was no
oxygen in the atmosphere. So it was only
the fusion of the archaacteria that was
actually able to capture uh oxygen and
then lead to the mezzone multisellular
organism. Before that everything was a
single cell. So these cancer cells are
simply falling back on ancient
fermentation pathways that were present
or all cells prior to the oxygen coming
into the atmosphere. It's the default
state because that literally was what
came first from an evolutionary
perspective. Yes. And the default state
of cells is proliferation. And the
default energy state is substrate level
phosphorilation because there was no
oxidative phosphorilation. And these
cancer cells are falling back and they
will grow out of control as long as they
have fuels to ferment. And the two fuels
that have been identified, we
interrogated all these are glucose and
glutamine.
Glucose and glutamine. And so that's a
sugar and that's an amino acid. Neither
of those obviously is a fatty acid. No
fat. they can't burn fatty acids. They
accumulate lipid droplets in the
cytoplasm. So, uh you need a good
mitochondria to burn fatty acids and and
what happens? You see all these cancer
cells loaded with lipid droplets and
those are the fatty acids that can't be
metabolized. I see. Okay. So, I was
looking at that figure in one of your
papers. These lip these big bubbles of
fat accumulate in these cancer cells and
you're just saying that's fat that's
accumulating because the cell can't
actually use it for energy production.
Absolutely. and and and in fact if you
take cells and put them in hypoxia they
start accumulating lipid droplets and as
soon as the oxygen comes back the lipid
droplets disappear. Wow. So this is
immediately make So so here's where my
mind's going. There's a couple ways we
can take this but here's one way that
connects to other podcasts I've done. So
I I became really interested in um lipid
peroxidation and how that relates to
dietary fat intake. And there's been
some interesting observations recently
in the literature. people like um Timmy
Aman and Holidayiday at the University
of South Florida, they have observed
that these that colon cancer basically
is seems to be coming from these highly
inflammatory states that are closely
linked to lipid
dysregulation. And what you're telling
me is, you know, if you're right that
mitochondrial metabol metabolism gets
disrupted, you can't use oxidative
phosphorilation as well. you can't
oxidize fatty acids as well. You start
making more reactive oxygen species.
This will increase the odds that you
will create lipid peroxides that are
toxic to the cell. And you know, if I go
back to the Holiday and Yateman work, if
your cells have accumulated a lot of say
polyunsaturated fatty acids, you've just
got more stuff now that can be turned
into toxic lipid peroxides from reactive
oxygen species. And so I'm starting to
connect some dots here for how things in
the lipid literature and and and and
that stuff relate to ankcoenesis based
on the the mitochondrial issue that that
you've been talking about. Yeah,
absolutely. And and and the the key
lipid in the inner membrane of the
mitochondria is cardioipippin uh which
is polyunsaturated and and you start
Ross damaging those and you start to
reduce the energy efficiency of the
electron transport chain the efficiency.
So yes, you're going to see a lot of and
you do see all this when you do really
careful examinations of lipid bio like
we have done in shotgun lipidomics. We
see all kinds of lipid abnormalities uh
in these cancer cells any one of which
could be produced by by peroxidations
and all these kinds of things and they
just contribute to the inflammatory
cascade that's going on uh in this and
then what happens is you you you create
what we call a wounding. It's like the
body, the immune system sees that
abnormality as a wound and they come in
and they throw cytoines and growth
factors on top of this which creates
then a worse situation. They're doing uh
things out of context uh creating making
a bad situation uh much much worse. So
uh you can see that and then we showed
how that leads to metastasis because the
immune cells start to fuse with these
cancer stem cells uh leading to uh
abnormal immune cell function leading to
spread of cancer cells around the body
all driven by by by glucose and
glutamine. So the the way we know we're
right is by the response of patients to
targeting glutamine glucose and glutami
glucose and glutamine at the same time
by transitioning the whole body over to
therapeutic ketosis. The cancer cells
can't burn fatty acids or ketone bodies
and they're dependent on on glucose and
glutamine for their disregulated growth.
Is that generally true? No cancer can
burn fatty acids. No, because they
accumulate them in the lipid droplets.
They they can't you have in fact we
throw it out to the field. Anybody who
can show us a cancer cells that can grow
on fatty acids or ketones in the absence
of fermentable fuels, I'll give them a
hundred bucks. I have the $100 here.
Yeah. Guess what? No. In fact, one of my
colleagues said I'll give you a thousand
bucks. the cancer cell can't grow
without fermentable fuels. It's you
can't burn fatty acids are non
fermentable. Okay. So, so this brings us
to now the question of well, so there's
two questions I want to get to. We're
going to have to take them separately.
So, there's the question of if you put a
if you put people into ketosis with a
ketogenic diet, to what extent can this
prevent or treat existing cancers? And
then there's the question that we have
to get to eventually, which is if broken
energy production in the mitochondria is
a cause of cancer, we have to then ask,
well, what's breaking the the
mitochondria to begin with? Let's take
those one at a time. So talk a little
bit more about ketosis and the use of a
ketogenic diet say as a cancer
prevention or treatment modality. Well,
I you know I years ago when I did the
calorie restriction stuff I I said well
you know how when we did the comparative
analysis of mouse and human you have to
understand basil metabolic rate the
basil metabolic rate of a mouse is seven
times that of of of a of a human. So
when we were getting these spectacular
responses to calorie restriction in the
mouse we said wow wow we let's see how
do we have to how do we translate that
over the human it's water only fasting.
So I said, "Oh my god." Because we saw
water only fast in the human produces
the same biochemical parameter changes
you see in a mouse under 40% calorie
restriction. So we thought, "Oh, just
cut down your food by 40%. You'll get
what this mouse does." No, no, no. You
got to go water only fasting because
there's differences in basil metabolic
rate. So I said, "Wow, that that ain't
going to fly." Uh how many people with
cancer are going to say, "I now I got to
not eat for 14 20 days. Just drink
water." People don't want to do that.
So, we were working with the ketogenic
diet and epilepsy and the little kids
were seem to be okay with that. So, we
said, why don't we try to because people
that seems at least you're eating
something. You're not like feeling
you're going to starve to death. And
then we started to work the ketogenic
diets, our knowledge of ketogenic diets
for epilepsy applied to the to the
cancer problem. And that seemed to be a
viable solution until everybody went
nuts about eating lard and doing all
this crazy stuff uh with ketogenic
diets. But what it actually does is a
paleolithic diet uh which we realized
can put you into nutritional ketosis if
you eat um foods that are low in
carbohydrates, restricted amounts of
highly uh uh restricted
carbohydrates. Uh you can get into a
nutrition state of nutritional ketosis
just like our paleolithic ancestors
where there was no highly processed
carbs uh and and and foods that would
raise blood sugar levels uh very high.
So exercise and low carbohydrates will
put you into a state of nutritional uh
ketosis. Now that state is very very uh
good for the normal cells of our body
because we my my late friend uh Richard
Vch Hans Krebs's last student and I
would talk for hours about the value of
ketone bodies being a super fuel. They
generate more ATP without producing
reactive oxygen species. Unbelievable.
So we can transition the whole body over
to ketones making the rest of the body
super healthy reducing systemic
inflammation a fuel that the tumor cells
can't can't use. So uh how do we do
that? Uh and the answer is we we can
take like on our recent Greek study you
should see this we were able to keep
these G glyopblasto patients alive for
three years or longer on these on these
Mediterranean ketogenic
calorierestricted Mediterranean diet was
un it was tremendous. So there's so many
ways to get into nutritional ketosis,
not uh not just using ketogenic diets.
You can you can use low carbohydrate
diets. Your body will start producing
ketones naturally uh from these from
these situations. So that's what that's
what we're doing. We're we're we're
transitioning people to nutritional
ketosis uh which lowers glucose and
replaces glucers blood sugar and
replaces the the sugar with ketones. The
brain can burn it, heart can burn it,
muscles can burn it. uh cancers cannot
burn it and then we have to go after the
glutamine targeting uh with drugs
because we we target we have to target
the glutamine with drugs and exercise.
So so is the essence of what you're
saying here or part of it that if you
put someone into nutritional ketosis
they're using ketone bodies like BHB to
generate energy much more so than
they're using glucose because it's a
very ultra low carb diet and you're
getting a high fat intake. So, is what
you're saying that you're essentially
because cancer cells can't use those
fatty acids that you're essentially
starving them, but your other non-cancer
cells are not starved because they can
use those ketone bodies. Yes, it's a
transition. Our body evolved. We're
we're a very versatile machine. We have
survived on this planet under the most
stringent conditions. We're all alive
today because of the flexibility of our
bioenergetic systems. The cancer cell
have compromised that bioenergetic
system by having dysfunctional oxidative
phosphorilation, pigeon holing them into
a fermentation metabolism. So they're
metabolically inflexible, which is the
very adaptation that is part of what
makes us human in many ways. You could
argue. Yeah. Perfectly. Yes. And yet the
cancer field says, "Oh, cancer cells are
so flexible. They're so versatile."
Because you're always giving them
fermentable fuels. As long as they have
fermentable fuels, they'll appear to be
very tough. And so you said you said
something earlier. So you said the
ketones uh I want to ask so so pound for
pound if you're giving a cell ketone
bodies as opposed to glucose. How is how
much ATB can be produced from the ketone
bodies molecule for molecule compared to
glucose and how much reactive oxygen
species are kicked out when you use one
substrate versus the other. Okay, let's
let's our our bodies will make ketones
in the liver. So you will mobilize the
triglycerides out of the out of the
atapost cells and they'll go into as as
insulin goes down glucagon the hormone
that u triggers the mobilization of fats
out of atapost sites goes up. So our
bloodstream starts to fill up with with
um um triglycerides. You can see it on
the TLC plates. We did it. Uh and those
triglycerides then go to the liver and
the liver takes the two um glycerol
backbones and makes actually can make a
glucose molecule through
gluconneogenesis. But that level of
glucose is just residual because the
brain will suck up like a like a vacuum
any any available glucose. Um so and
then the the the it's like putting fatty
acids into a wood chipper. uh you the
liver chops them up into water soluble
ketone bodies which now circulate
through the through the bloodstream and
go to all tissues that that have
adequate oxidative phosphorilation. So
so where are we getting uh our energy
from is a ketone body. Now let's get
back to the why the ketone body is such
a powerful fuel and go now we're because
they have more carbon hydrogen bonds
than does a pyuvate and now I'm going to
explain this to you. So, so uh we get
more uh reducing equivalence NADH out of
a ketone body than we do out of a
pyuvate molecule. So, we're we're
producing the fuel
for a greater amount of fuel for
oxidative phosphorilation by burning a
ketone body. Number one. Uh number two,
ketone bodies deliver all their
electrons to complex one with very
little being delivered to complex two.
So we create a a more oxidized co-enzyme
Q couple which leads to an efficiency
that proton mode of gradient will go up
ever so slightly without a without uh uh
they do not uncouple. So um ketone
bodies do not uncouple. So So you're
saying you're saying ketones if you're
on a ketogenic diet your body's using
ketones that promotes greater coupling
in the mitochondria. Yes. a a a 28%
better coupling than pyuvate. Now,
people will say, well, why don't you
burn fatty acids? Because they have a
lot more carbon hydrogen bonds um than
than does the ketone body or the
pyuvate. And what happens is they create
a very steep proton motive gradient
almost like then you the body has to
release the pressure. So, they
automatically turn on uh uncoupling
proteins naturally. So they dissipate
the proton motor gradient uh reducing
the delta G- prime ATP hydraulic even
though they have more carbon hydrogen
bonds. It's too steep. It's too steep
and the body the they naturally open up
u uncoupling uh regulated uncoupling
proteins thereby reducing the efficiency
of energy with the fatty acid. uh the
ketone body does not uncouple produces
very few oxygen radicals and has more uh
carbon hydrogen bond does the pyuvate
thereby calling it a super fuel for each
breath of oxygen you take in burning
ketones you get more power from from
from from that bioenergetic efficiency
of a ketone body this is unbelievable so
this allow this allowed us to survive
the most harsh conditions of famine and
and droughts and all this because we're
able to shift from one fuel source to
the other for and our brain is naturally
capable of burning ketones. They burn
sugar, they burn glucose and they burn
ketone bodies, but we are we are capable
of transitioning our nervous system over
to ketone bodies. So, so that that keeps
us alive and functional. So, so some
people argue, well, if you give the
body, the human body, glucose and
ketones, if you give it carbohydrates
and fats, it will preferentially burn
the carbohydrates and therefore that's
what our cells want and that's the
better fuel supply. What do you make of
that argument? Well, I think that's true
in part not because it's a better fuel
fuel supply. Uh, is is that when you
take in carbohydrates, you turn off
glucagon. insulin goes up, glucagon goes
down, you piss out the ketones. So, it's
the way the body is is is is utilizing
this. You have to look at the hormonal
balance. When you're in nutritional
ketosis, insulin is low, glucagon is
elevated. As soon as those carbs come
in, insulin goes up, glucagon goes down.
You don't need the brain will
preferentially burn burn glucose for
sure, but but it has the capability of
adapting to ketones slowly. That's why
you can't go oh real real quick. Yeah.
So, so I'm going to give you sort of my
take on some of this and I would love to
get your reaction to it. So, a lot of
people love to get into the holy wars of
carbohydrates are a better substrate,
fatty acids are a better substrate,
ketosis is better, carbohydrates are
better. My sort of view when I take an
evolutionary lens to look at how humans
evolved and the metabolic f the
remarkable metabolic flexibility that we
have whether or not you know one group
of humans ate a ketogenic diet or a high
carbohydrate diet or whatever I think in
pre-industrial times in paleolithic
times for most of human
evolution people were transitioning from
one metabolic state to another probably
on a seasonal basis at least and so in
some sense It's not that we're supposed
to be in ketosis all the time. We're
supposed to be in carb burn all the
time, but I think we're probably adapted
to switch between these on a seasonal
basis and as a function of the feast and
famine cycles that naturally happened
for most of human history. And so it's
actually the metabolic flexibility and
the switching between states that might
be the thing to focus on here rather
than trying to pigeon hole people as
being, you know, we we should eat
carbohydrates or we should eat fats all
the time.
Yeah, you're you're you're 100% right on
that. We have to look at our
evolutionary past and who were we as a
species. Yes, we were feast and famine
and and during seasonal periods when
fruits were ripe and you had more more
carbohydrate people and ripe berries and
all this kind of stuff. Uh you would you
would gravitate uh towards that and
that's the beauty of our body. It's a
very flexible machine. Uh we we evolved
to be extremely flexible in how we
during seasonal times, exercise, all
this kind of stuff. The tumor cell is
not flexible. So it cannot make those
transitions readily. If you're locking a
body into a low carbohydrate diet and in
a ketosis, yeah, it's going to put
pressure on the tumor cell. But then if
you switch to a high carbohydrate diet
really well, the body knows how to do
this the normal cells, but the tumor
cell, even though you'd be giving it the
fuel, it it can't make the the rapid
transition. So you can just go up and
down as long as you know how to use.
This is why we developed the glucose
ketone index calculator which will be
the new tool uh for managing cancer and
chronic disease in the population. This
is a ratio of circulating glucose to to
circulating ketones and it comes out as
a as a ratio and we know that we we
exist in certain zones in our life uh
that put us at risk uh if we have high
GKI all the time we put ourselves at
risk for a broad range of chronic
diseases and mitochondrial damage as as
the result of a variety of insults on
the efficiency of oxidative
phosphorilation. But if we go down into
the the green zone, which is a GK of 2.0
and below, we're going to put a world of
hurt on these cancer cells. But how long
do we stay in the green zone before we
flip back up to a a yellow? In other
words, going up and down because our
bodies just like just like you said,
Nick, we evolved to be in these
different states uh seasonally. Uh where
the cancer cells are not flexible, but
our bodies are flexible and we can
actually eliminate these tumor cells
gradually by taking the full power of
the health ability of our body and
marginalizing these these tumor cells
out of existence. So you're right, we
need to know about how our bodies work.
What is what does it mean to be in metab
metabolic homeostasis?
uh what do we do in these how does our
body maintain homeo homeostatic home
metabolic homeostasis in different in
different zones of the glucose ketone
index and this is you know we're working
with Greg Glman former owner of the
CrossFit and Emily Kumer Kaplan we're
going to build these metfix boxes uh
where we're going to be able to train
people to know how to use the gly gl
glucose ketone index uh monitor to put
themselves into different zones
switching from from the zones that you
that you have mentioned to make our
lives more meaningful. Uh but knowing
that we can uh by moving in and out of
these zones, we can we can keep
ourselves at a at a much a much higher
state of of of of health. And we would
have it on our cell phones so that we
can then monitor on the cell phone at
any given time what your GKI is and
knowing what zone you're in relatively
uh on that particular day and how long
you want to stay in these dangerous
zones and how long you want to stay in
that super healthy zones becomes a
personal choice.
So if to the extent that broken
mitochondrial metabolism underlies
cancer because uh if you can't use
oxidative phosphorilation effectively
you're going to use these more
evolutionarily primitive forms of energy
production like glycolysis. You're
saying cancer cells exhibit that more.
They're not using oxidative
phosphorilation as much. To the extent
that's true, it begs the question of
what is breaking mitochondrial
metabolism and the ability to use
oxidative phosphorilation to begin with.
Do we know what some of the major
drivers are there for that disruption?
Yeah, we know most of them. And this was
Albert Seni's encogenic paradox which we
solved in the in which we've already
solved. He was always mysterious. He was
always like, whoa, you almost anything
you you've identified can cause cancer
at one one form or another. What's the
common pathofysiological mechanism
leading to chronic disruption of
oxidative phosphorilation? So when I did
in my book in 2012, I went back and
looked at chemical carcinogens and a lot
of these chemical carcinogens cause
autofllororesence in the mitochondria uh
leading to disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation. Ankcoenic viruses uh
like papilloma virus, hepatitis C vi
these viruses either enter the
mitochondria themselves or the products
produced in the nucleus go to the
mitochondria to disrupt oxidative
phosphorilation. um radiation, we know
intermittent hypoxia, we know rare uh in
chronic inflammation, C reactive
protein, elevations of C reactive
protein linked to systemic inflammation.
Systemic inflammation chronically
damages the efficiency of oxidative
phosphorilation. um rare inherited
mutations like people say oh what about
bracka 1 what about the uh what about
pet relief ramen many what about the uh
you know retinol blasto these are known
genetic uh risk factors every one of
those risk factors damages oxidative
phosphorilation in one way or another so
they're and none of them are 100%
penetrate meaning they're secondary risk
factors you know why some woman with a
with a brack one mutation uh gets cancer
and another woman with the same mutation
never gets cancer so because whatever
only the ones that have cancer have
oxidative phosphorilation dysfunction
coupled to a sub secondary fermentation.
So what you're saying what you're saying
is the reason that those BRCA mutations
famously linked to breast cancer is not
because 100% of the breast cancers
require those mutations. It's because if
you have the mutation it indicates you
definitely have that mitochondrial
dysfunction. But even if you don't have
that mutation you can still have
mitochondrial dysfunction. which is why
you observe both the mutation and the
absence of the mutation with breast
cancer. Yes, that's and and also 50% of
the women that have the mutation
uh get get breast cancer but but 50% of
them that have the mutation do not get
breast cancer. So why do the women with
the have the mutation don't get breast
cancer? It seems that in those women the
mutation was never capable of damaging
oxidative phosphorilation even though
the mutation was there. Oxfos continued
to function effectively in the presence
of the mutation. People say, well, what
could cause that? Well, in genetics,
we've known for we know what we call
suppressor genes. These are these are
other genes in the genome that suppress
the action of one gene. So, how does
suppressor genes work to to reduce
penetrance of some of these uh inherited
risk factors and the answer is uh we
don't know precisely uh how that works.
But but certainly an area of very
interesting uh uh study you know why why
should somebody with a you know with a
leaf rail many leaf rail many is the is
the most penetrant of all the inherited
risk factors and it's it codes for um
cytochrome synthesis of cytochrome C2 uh
which affects the electron transport
chain that's about 90% penetrant well
what explains the 10% that have the
mutation that don't get any cancers uh
maybe a suppressor gene or something
also it allows us to now know that if
this is the case, we can use uh diet and
lifestyle to reduce the risk of even the
inherited uh risk factors. So we we have
more control. Uh bottom line is once you
know cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disease, you have a much greater control
as to whether or not you're going to get
a cancer.
So there's many different ways to break
mitochondrial metabolism. That's part of
what you were just saying. You know, age
is a factor, inflammation, pathogens,
hypoxia, you name it. There's there's
you know chemical exposures can break
all of these things can break
mitochondrial metabolism even though
they're very different things. Another
thing I want to mention here is you know
as we alluded to earlier the
mitochondria are endo symbiotic in
origin. They used to be free-living
cyanobacteria but that got engulfed
somehow by our cells and they are
because of their origin in that way they
are light sensitive. So they're
modulated by light and obviously one of
the ways the physical environment is
very different today than it was for our
paleolithic ancestors is that the light
environment is very different. The
pattern and intensity of different
wavelengths of light that we're exposed
to are different and the mitochondria
are light sensitive. What do we know
about light and its ability to drive
messed up mitochondrial metabolism?
Well, that that might come through um um
the um melanin
uh melatonin the these kinds of light
sensitive hormones. Uh yes, we we
evolved in a light dark cycle. Uh light
is extremely important for the normal
circadian rhythms. Normal circadian
rhythms maintain mitochondrial function.
So if we're if we're exposed to uh le
having less exposure to light than our
than our ancestors did, it it's just one
more of the stress factors that uh
contribute to mitochondrial uh oxidative
phosphorilation dysfunction. Yes. A very
important m it links to the circadian
rhythms. You say we we say today what's
what's responsible for the the cancer
epidemic with we have one we have uh
618,000 people are predicted to die in
uh from cancer which comes down to
1,700 people a day uh or 70 people per
hour are expected to die this year uh
from from cancer. Clearly, clearly we're
we're we're in an epidemic of of of of
of this of unhealth. Okay. So, you have
light sensitivity. You you you have poor
a lot of highly processed carbohydrates
that are minimally nutritionally of
value that create uh systemic
inflammation. You have lack of exercise.
You have emotional stress. Whether
you're sitting in traffic, you're
looking at the computer, you're looking
at your cell phone all day long. uh you
have poor sleep as the result of the uh
uh circadian rhythm disruption. Uh you
you put all those factors together and
you have an epidemic not only of cancer
but of all these chronic diseases as
well. Type 2 diabetes uh you have
obesity. Uh you you have cardiovascular
disease, you have cancer, you have the
whole package, dementia. You put all
those things together and the and the
majority of our chronic diseases
including cancer are the result of
mitochondrial dysfunction coupled to a
substrate level phosphorilation
contributed by a whole variety of
different factors uh in the environment.
This is called the anogenic paradox.
That's why we solve this. And then you
can use a glucose ketone index to bring
yourself back into these uh healthier
zones. So do what you need to do to get
light to to reduce your stress to get
more exercise and you bring yourself
back into a more normal zone thereby
reducing cancer risk and and and and and
chronic disease risk. So so clearly we
have a clear strategy. The question is
can the American public recognize this
and now and now take steps to prevent
cancer and if you do get cancer how to
manage it and prevent other chronic
diseases.
I want to ask you some more details
about therapeutic ketogenic diets such
as those that that you and others have
used um in this area of research. So
there's many different ketogenic diets
one could eat. And what I mean by that
is you know the fatty acid profile of
your ketogenic diet could be very
different from someone else's. You might
be having high saturated fat, high
polyunsaturated fat, monounsaturated u
all the different combinations thereof.
We mentioned earlier that
polyunsaturated fatty acids they can be
oxidized readily by reactive oxygen
species and this produces toxic uh
byproducts reactive aldahhides and
things like this that damage cell
components and we you know we alluded to
some other work that's been done related
to that stuff. When you guys use a
therapeutic ketogenic diet, what are the
specific fatty acid profiles that you
use? And what's important to think about
here in terms of fatty acid composition
from saturated to more unsaturated fats?
Well, this the saturated fats uh
mediumchain triglycerides are are more
provocative for bu building nice uh
ketone bodies than polyunsaturated fatty
acids. Polyunsaturated fatty acids can
give uh flexibility to membranes like
olive oils and things like this. I mean
there's there's a number of
polyunsaturated fatty acids that are
very fish oils and things like this uh
that are very healthy for you. Um but to
make ketones and the answer is uh we we
use we use mono um mediumchain
triglycerides, avocados, we try to get
we try to do it with as much natural uh
fatty acids as possible. Always calorie
restricting them. always using the
glucose ketone index which is the ratio
of circulating ketones to glucose as
kind of a guide. Uh so um people say you
we use the GKI more uh to know what zone
you're in uh as opposed to the types of
fatty acids that you are consuming. But
we but we know there are natural ways to
get ketones ketogenesis natural ketosis.
uh you're mobilizing the fats
predominantly out of your uh uh
atyposytes, but at the same time if you
take in a diet with mediumchain
triglycerides, whether it comes from a
plant or an animal, uh you'll get you'll
produce better uh all natural ketone
bodies. And again, it should be done
under low glucose because the lower the
glucose, the more the need for the body
to make ketones uh from the liver. So um
and you're you're right about that. I
mean, we're experimenting more with
that. What are the best diets to produce
the most natural forms of ketone bodies?
Again, with understanding calorie
restriction and using the GKI as a
quantitative measure. So, we no longer
need to be in a mysterious state. Oh, I
think I'm in ketosis by pissing on some
strip or blowing out some some thing. We
actually have a ratio now that is based
on blood on blood. Uh we have a glucose
continuous monitor. Now, we're going to
eventually we'll have glucose ketone
continuous monitors. So, we'll be able
to know precisely what level of ketosis
we're in and the types of fatty acids
that we can consume to bring us into
these zones in a healthy state. Okay.
But it it sounds like in essence what
you're saying is that okay, the
ketogenic diet is a highfat ultra low
carb diet. You're going to use those
fats to make ketones for energy as
opposed to glucose. But those ketones,
those fatty acids that you're using for
energy, those are more readily made from
shorter chain smaller fatty acids.
Whereas the longer chain polyunsaturated
fat fatty acids are more likely to be
used for like membrane structures and
things like that. Yeah, that's true. Um
they're not burned uh as readily as the
as the other fatty acids, but some of
them are are unhealthy like you
mentioned. They can create inflammation
like arachidonic acid uh 24 uh that's a
provocative inflammatory uh fatty acid
used for um you know inflam inflammatory
uh conditions where others uh like
omega-3s are used for anti-inflammatory
uh activities. So it it sounds like you
would not recommend someone to have a
very high omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty
acid content in their ketogenic diet.
Um yeah, I I think we need to work
better on that. I I think I think we
need to be more cognizant of the foods.
Uh ultimately, we're going to be taking
in the food. We want to have uh a food
menu that is
palatable and therapeutic at the same
time. Um and that's where uh food
science and technology uh will start
making their move into this into this
space into this zone. uh improving uh uh
making natural ketone bodies more
efficiently from foods that are known to
be healthy uh as opposed to those that
are not being healthy. And I think
that's a an area that will be exploding
uh here in in the next uh several years
and and we're going to have the
quantitative biomarkers to to let people
know number one, how do you feel? What
state are you in? Oh, you know, it's
like unbelievable. So, uh and and it
might be different from one person to
another. We can't group. We we have
people that are different in age, in
gender, in culture, in religion. Uh all
of these will have to be uh recognized
when we're building these new uh
strategies uh for managing chronic
disease. So this is the future. Uh right
now, you just have to have the platform,
the bedrock upon which to build all
these in a logical way. Um recognizing
that cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disorder now allows us to shift uh to
logical science-based strategies for
managing this and of course the chronic
disease world will be dragged along uh
with this because the cancer is
recognized as the number one fearful
disease in the world. It's not getting
better, it's getting worse. When someone
is diagnosed with diabetes, uh they they
don't feel like like the uh angel of
death is looking over their shoulder.
When you get cancer, you know, you're
looking at the grim reaper. Well, this
this has all got to change. Uh yes,
it'll be an unfortunate diagnosis, but
we have a clear strategy on how to
manage that without collateral toxicity.
There should be none of these medieval
treatments of of of poisonous chemicals,
surgical mutilations the way we're doing
it and incinerating radiations. I mean,
we can use all of those strategies, but
now they have to be recognized to be
used in a very different plan than they
are currently being used. So I I'm very
hopeful for the future of managing not
only cancer but m multiple other chronic
diseases and giving individuals the tool
to know uh they they'll now be able to
take much greater charge uh over their
existence because they'll have the
definite tools and know what to do and
how to do it. And that's a personal
choice and you can either do it or not
do it. It's not we're not forcing
anybody. We're not going to tell anybody
don't eat that, don't eat this. You just
look at the GKI monitor. it'll tell you
whether you should eat it or not. You
make the choice for yourself.
Um, I want to zoom out a little bit. So,
cancer at the level of society, where
are we with cancer in terms of, you
know, how common it is and whether or
not certain cancers are becoming more
common today than they used to be? Can
you give us a general sense of that?
Yeah, the general sense is that it's
becoming more and more in younger
people. I I I I I think uh I'm not sure
we're seeing it. I'm seeing it. I I you
know I I get calls and emails all the
time from young people asking me to help
them with transitioning to metabolic
therapy. Uh and we give them a net a
planned. We've written we we've written
a very comprehensive treatment protocol
for managing glyopblastoma which could
be used for any cancer. But we're seeing
so many people in the late 20s and early
30s now with colon cancer, breast
cancer, uh various types of cancers
where we would never see that many in
the past. And and I and as I said when
when this new big paper we put out uh on
on uh the Warberg hypothesis and the
emergence of the mitochondrial metabolic
theory, we have a big section in there
where we've now incorporated forever
chemicals and
microlastics and these kinds of things
that are now entering our environment in
greater amounts than we had in the past.
You you couple that with an obesity
epidemic where where chronic disease C
reactive protein is now elevated and you
combine that with these these uh other
things and I think that could account in
large part for why we're seeing cancer
at younger and younger ages uh in these
people. So everything is related to our
metabolic homeostasis and the exposures
that we're getting for provocative
agents that will chronically disrupt
oxidative phosphorilation. H when we go
back and we think about the sociology
and the history of science piece of this
that we were talking about towards the
beginning, it reminded me of the saga of
the diet heart hypothesis and Ancel Keys
that many have talked about in in the
diet world where you know long story
short, you know, my interpretation of
all of that that I share with many
people is that, you know, Anel Keys's
ideas became dominant not because they
won a scientific battle on a level
playing field, but largely because uh of
social and political influence. fluence.
The right people in the right positions
uh uh championed those ideas. They
suppressed alternative ideas that they
were competing against through
artificial means and those ideas became
enshrined at the level of public policy
such that for decades at a time, you
know, the the food pyramid and all that
stuff was constructed with this one
model being treated as unassalable fact
when in fact it was just one model that
never had uh a total true consensus
behind it. And I couldn't help but but
notice that in the Warberg cancer
biology saga that you told us about,
something similar happened where the
ideas weren't competing head-to-head on
a pure scientific basis, but they sort
of moved and became more prominent for
social and political reasons. Yeah, I
think so. U but this is the nature of of
the way we move forward. uh uh and as I
said during the Capernacian revolution
uh that was not taken lightly uh by by
the Catholic Church and other other uh
religious organizations. Um and led to a
lot of upheaval uh in in the way uh
people uh and and and
uh and the way establishments viewed uh
their position in in in in the world.
And I think I think the the um paradigm
shift for cancer going from a from a
genetic disease uh to a mitochondrial
metabolic disease uh will have uh every
bit of of of of
uh of tumultuous change as did the
capernician revolution because if in
those days it wasn't if you thought the
sun was the center of the solar system
or the earth whether you dis agreed or
disagreed it wasn't associated with with
1,700 people a day dying. Our
misunderstanding of this situation today
uh uh that cancer is a genetic disease
is absolutely responsible for the 1,700
people a day dying. Those people are
dying because they're be being viewed as
having something other than what they
have. They do not have a genetic
disease. So these precision medicines
that are all based on the sematic
mutation theory are are indirectly
allowing the the the field not to move
forward. And as the result, we're
getting all these poor people that are
dying. So the consequences of not
knowing what you're talking about
scientifically have dire dire
consequences uh for people. The
suffering and death is enormous that
we're seeing with this cancer today. And
that's all because they refuse to accept
the Warberg and the the idea that this
is a mitochondrial metabolic disease.
Revenue generation is more important
than patient outcome. We know this for a
fact. The National Cancer Institute says
it's a genetic disease funding millions
of dollars in grant support on on a
flawed theory. So, we're getting more
and more dead people based on a lack of
knowledge or or ideological dogma uh
that's preventing the transition. And
and th this is this is tragic, a tragedy
of greatest proportion. Mhm. So, so with
your view of mitochondrial metabolism
taking center stage in terms of cancer,
what are some of the best and simplest
ways people can manage their lives to
prevent cancer? Would you re would you
say that people should be um going into
ketosis one way or another at least
intermittently as part of their
strategy? I I think so. And exercise
plays a session all we're doing is
bringing ourselves back occasionally to
the paleolithic period where cancer did
not was not prevalent. How do we know
that from the work of Albert Schwitzer
looking at tribes of people that live
according to their traditional ways? So,
so yes, I agree. I think that as long as
we are aware of what of what we need to
do and how to do it, then it becomes our
our job to to act upon that. Um but
right now I the misinformation
associated with with the food pyramids
and with the with what cancer is this
level of misinformation is causing a
tragic consequence to the health and
vitality of our population. So uh so
yeah we can prevent cancer if you can
keep your mitochondria healthy. It's
very hard to get cancer when
mitochondria healthy because
mitochondrial dysfunction is the origin
of cancer. So maintaining metabolic
homeostasis is absolutely essential for
preventing cancer and other chronic
diseases. So it's not bad luck. It's not
this crazy nonsense that you hear about
people talking about. It's our it's our
it's our diet lifestyle issues that
predominantly are responsible for our
our our health. But at least if we have
tools to put us into zones that we know
about, then it becomes up to us that we
have greater control over our destiny.
anything you want to reiterate or or any
final thoughts you want to leave people
with about what we discussed around
cancer and metabolism?
No, I think you know you you've done a
wonderful job uh getting down into the
nitty-gritty. Most folks that I talk
about on these podcasts uh we rarely
have an opportunity uh to go down into a
deeper uh a deeper level uh of our
understanding. You you you have to
realize that in our lab here at Boston
College, this is all we do. We discuss
these things day and night, night and
day. We have groups here. All we do is
sit around doing experiments, testing
our ideas, and discussing the concepts.
And we always looking for somebody who's
going to come at us with some piece of
evidence not consistent. And we look for
that's why we're offering a hundred
bucks. You show me a cancer cell that
can can I'll be more than happy to give
you the hundred bucks. 100 bucks,
people. Yeah, $100 I'll give you a thou
my some of my friends will give you a
thousand bucks. So, so, so but but the
issue is here we haven't had any takers
and those who say that, you know, we
always find that there you got plenty of
fermentable fuels in your environment.
Get rid of that and see what happens.
Um, but but we're we're testing all this
and and and and the other thing too is
our research is supported predominantly
by private foundations and philanthropy.
So, we're we we do what we think we need
to do and how to do it ourselves. Um,
and and that and you'd be surprised.
This is a revolution coming. This is a
health revolution that's on its way and
and it's going to be restructured and
it's going to be open to the people and
they're going to know how to use this.
And the long the better that we have the
best animal models of cancer, all
natural, none of this artificial, these
genetically constructed monstrosities,
patient derived xenographs, all these
these crazy things that think that that
you can get grants on but have very
little relevance to the real world. So
we always do everything naturally. We
have natural metastic cancer. We know
how metastatic cancer works. We know how
to stop metastatic cancer. We know how
to do all this because we have the
science behind us to do all this stuff.
and and as long as we get uh donations
from people who want to be part of the
movement, the transition, the paradigm
shift, whatever you want to call it,
they're excited about this. The future
is excited about this. So, so uh we're
moving in the right direction and and uh
private foundations and philanthropy are
giving us the support that we can do all
this and I keep publishing these papers
in open access journals so everybody can
read the read the papers. People ask me
all these questions. The answers are in
the papers. Please read the papers and
you'll get the answers. All right, Dr.
Thomas Seaff Freed, thank you very much
for your time. Well, thank you very
[Music]
much. Visit
mindandmatter.substack.com to find all
of my content. Hey everyone, I want to
take just a minute to tell you about a
really cool health monitoring device
I've been using called Lumen. It's a
handheld pocket-size device with a sleek
design. The Lumen device measures CO2
levels in your breath, which allows
their technology to determine the extent
to which your body is burning fats
versus carbohydrates. Lumen helps
improve your metabolic flexibility, your
body's efficiency in shifting between
using fats and carbs for energy. I use
this device in the morning or before bed
or after meals or after workouts to
track my metabolism. With just a couple
weeks of use, I learned a lot about
which foods were causing my body to burn
mostly fat, mostly carbs, or both, as
well as how long I needed to fast and
how hard I needed to exercise to promote
fat burning. Being able to track whether
your body is burning fat versus carbs
will help you figure out how your body
responds to your lifestyle and whether
or not your weight loss and fitness
strategies are actually working. Lumen
is great for anyone looking to optimize
their health for either weight loss or
athletic performance. Their easytouse
app allows you to track your results
together with what you're eating and how
you're exercising. And it syncs with
other devices like the Apple Watch.
Click the link in the episode
description to learn more. And use the
code mind matter, m i n d m a t e r, to
get 10% off your Lumen device today.
That's on top of the sitewide sale they
are currently running. And the Lumen
device is eligible to be paid for with
FSA and HSA health accounts. Check out
the link in the episode description for
more info.